Hello again, Oliver Knox here - University lecturer at the University of New England and CottonInfo Soil Health Lead, and we want to talk a little about compaction because we all know no two seasons are the same but recently, the soils have been wet and they get compacted when that happens. It's been unavoidable, and you need to now think about OK, what do we do about correcting it? How do we implement those options that we have? And what will it mean for the season ahead? Well, the normal rules around are: you’ve got it, so you now need to let the soils recover and that takes time and many of you have not had that time – you’ve gone back to back. So if that’s been the situation for you, but you think you’ve had some compaction, you know it’s there, then you’ve got to be realistic about what that’s going to mean for your crops. So we’ve come off a wet pick, we’ve got some compaction, we know it’s there. We can see maybe ruts and even some filling with water in the field. Well if you’re going back to back you need to accept that what you’ve done to the soil is going to limit the plants’ ability to put out their roots through that soil profile and you’re going to likely reduce your yields. if you’re realistic about it, it means you can manage that crop get a better feel for how it’s responding in those compacted fields and therefore still hopefully come out with a profitable end to the season. If you’ve got a bit more time, if you’re allowing the soil to recover of if it’s dried out enough where you are, then sometimes cultivation can be a really nice way to alleviate some of that surface compaction. Your cultivation’s only going to get you in so far – what are you doing to the soil underneath? How bad is it? Now you know me – I love to dig a pit and I love to see those zones, those fracture plains and actually get a feel for how bad and how deep that compaction is and if it’s dried out maybe that’s something you want to think about – digging across your wheel traffics and just getting a feel for how bad it may or may not still be, and what level of cultivation will actually give you some remediation or alleviation of that. That’s one option. Another is just time. If you’re on a smectitic – one of these wonderful shrink-swelling vertosols that so many of us have, then actually time will be another way that some of these soils will recover. Natural drying periods, natural periods of rainfall will actually allow those soils to shrink and swell in such a way that new fracture plains open up and they do eventually alleviate that compaction. It can take years to get right back to where we were but any any kind of seasonal changes like that are really good. Again if time is on your side and you’re not going back to back, think about what you plant next. Putting in crops that are actually going to take that moisture back out of the profile. Allowing that drying to occur which brings the cracks back into those systems, allows he structure to come back to our soils is another option. It doesn’t really matter what we do as long as we’re thinking about it in some way and we’re just getting some feel for the soils then we’re going to come out with a positive outcome to our season. Compaction - we know that it takes seconds to have damage and impact, but it does take time and needs patience and it needs some thought as to how we remediate it. It’s not easy, it never is, but if you know it’s there, if you’re realistic about the impacts it’s going to have, then hopefully you’ll come out the other end of the season feeling really happy about the way you’ve managed your crop.