For the past 3 years we’ve been conducting research looking at the extent to which soils were being constrained in the eastern cotton industry of Australia. The project came from observations that we’d made ourselves commercially where we were seeing poor root development in a lot of our cotton crops, and so we decided to partner with Goanna telemetry, interrogating their database of around 800 soil moisture probes to investigate the extent to which root development was an issue across the entire cotton industry. What we found in the database we interrogated was that about 20% of the sites had no root development at all below 50cm in the soil profile, which led us to ask the question ‘What were the drivers behind this?’. Over the last few years commercial practice has tended towards shortening our irrigation deficits up to capitalise on the current genetics. That possibly was able to explain some of the mechanisms behind the poor root development, but it was largely (we felt) related to soil structural decline at depth from soils that were largely more fragile related to heightened levels of sodicity in the bottom of the soil profiles. Sodicity is when the soil surface is above 6% sodium of the total percentage of cations. Some of the sites we looked at had 25% sodium in the 60-90cm layer in the soil profile. So the influence largely that sodicity has, particularly deeper in the profile, creates this structural instability, where in the shortened irrigation interval scenario, the soil was wetter for longer, and basically the soil was literally falling to pieces, effectively just creating a physical barrier in the bottom of the soil profile. One of the really desirable attributes of our grey cracking clays is their soil water holding capacity, and the soil water holding capacity is directly related to the soil porosity. It’s very important to be able to maintain that porosity and that lattice in our soil to be able to store our soil water, have good levels of soil biology and have good root activity in these soils. What sodium does in this instance is basically create a situation where we’ve got structural instability, and we can begin to lose soil porosity and microbial activity as a result of lower levels of gas exchange as soil structure declines. So we begin to lose the desirable attributes of our soils. It’s important to understand the levels of sodicity that you have in your soil, and certainly through the profile, and understand how your agronomic practice (e.g. irrigation management and crop sequencing) can potentially mitigate any negative impacts that sodicity might have.