In a previous video we talked very briefly about the amazing soil biology we find in a single aggregate. But how can we actually get a feel for how good our biology is? Well the simplest thing we can do is to soil our undies. We can take a nice pristine pair of white cotton underpants and bury them (and there’s plenty of information available on how), and that microbial diversity and abundance – if it’s working – will basically go to town breaking down that cellulose (those cotton fibres) and accessing the sugar that they’re made of because what these plants [indicated behind] are doing is turning sugar into cotton and then we wear that cotton, and the bugs in the soil (if they’re present, active and healthy) will break that down and reduce our underpants to next to nothing. It’s a great way to actually see if our soils are healthy and if our biology is happy and active. It’s very similar to the biology’s approach to breaking down the mineral content of our soils, the crop residues that we return, our fertilisers and the way in which it processes all of that back into mineral nutrition that our plants can access and then grow healthily. So the question is how do we look after the biology in our soils? Well the real way we do it is we have to feed it and look after it, and we do that through organic matter returns, so increasing our amount of crop residues. Or by cover cropping. Cover cropping may be about looking when you get your predominant rainfall so you can actually get a cover crop up and spray it out so it can be on the soil at a time when you can capture rainfall rather than drying the profile out. The other thing you may consider is the use of organics - biosolids, composts and manures - if you have access to them. Again, these things all take time. They’re not instantaneous. A mentor of mine used to say you need 10 years of that kind of treatment to start to see a real shift in the biology in your fields and actually notice a difference. But if you want to look after the little fellows that are driving your system, these are the things we’ve got to be doing. Avoid bare fallows, look after your soil, and eventually it’ll look after your crops.