The next thing we’ll look at is soil structure, and as we do our soil structure, we can begin to think about porosity, mottles and stuff -to do that I’m going to make use of my beat sheet and lay it down in the furrow here in front of me and use this as a sorting surface. Again, instructions are inside the guide and they tell us to lift a spade’s depth and a spade’s width worth of soil to look at structure. Again, there’s information in here about why structure is important. A few times we’ve done this we’ve hit really hard soil; today there’s a bit of give so it’s not too bad. We’ve basically lifted up a spade depth by a spade square’s worth of soil, and the next thing we’re going to do is called the drop test which will the start of how we assess soil structure. We’re going to drop the soil into the box from a height of roughly one metre. Each bit of soil gets up to 3 drops into the box, and anything that’s fist size or above, pick up and drop again. We’ve lifted our spade of soil, we’ve done the drop 3 times from the height of 1 metre into our box and that’s going to give an aggregate structure. Now we tip that out onto the beat sheet. So now we’ve tipped out the soil and we’re going to separate the aggregates. This is easier to do with somebody else, and the best way to approach it is to decide which end of the sheet for the big bits and which end’s for the small bits so you don’t end up working against each other. Move my big bits to this end; the larger pieces, the moderate pieces, maybe brushing up some of the small ones. A few more moderate pieces there, and we start to see how these aggregates are distributed. It’s fairly rough and crude I’ll grant you, but it’s also quite effective. Back in the VSA scorecard we’ve got a series of images: poor structure, large clods that don’t really break down much more. What we’re looking at here would probably be sitting somewhere along the moderate scoreline – some largish, some smallish and a lot of fine. Really good is when you’ve got largely that beautiful friable soil with nothing too large. So I’d probably score this a 1 out of 2. While we’re breaking up that soil, it’s also a good chance to look for earthworms, because earthworms is another of our assessments (in fact it’s the only biological assessment in the VSA). I haven’t seen any in this particular sample, and in the 300 or so of these that we’ve done across the industry, we’ve only found earthworms at 3 sites. In several sites though we have seen signs of earthworm activity; there might be holes or burrows through some of the larger aggregates but there’s nothing like that here, so my earthworm score will also be zero. So having looked then at our texture and structure, and quickly done our biological assessment for earthworms, we can then move on to some of the other features that have a more chemical aspect.