Land and water are the two essential natural resources that are critical for cotton production that are increasing in value. In recent years, water is becoming more scarce and expensive, and a lot of cotton growers are redesigning their farm to improve the irrigation efficiency of their field, which involves moving a large volume of soil to fix the slopes and grade, and that could potentially lead to more variability across the field. Removing the topsoil from one end of the field can expose the subsoil with low organic matter, low nutrient status and higher sodicity. One of the challenges cotton growers face is how they can manage that soil variability and how to minimise its impact and improve the productivity. One of the ways this problem can be minimised is to develop an accurate cotton field map that will help in future soil and water management. One of the management options is reserving some of the topsoil, completing the laser levelling and grading, and then distributing the topsoil evenly across the entire field. In the medium to long term, more even fertility offsets the cost of the laser levelling by having uniform crop production across the entire field. The other common problem while redesigning the farm growers encounter is changing the row configuration. They change the row spacing or the row direction perpendicular to the existing configuration, and this could lead to historical interrow compaction emerging as a challenge to manage. This type of compaction is not easy to overcome. While the top 30-40cm can be fixed to some extent by deep ripping, the subsoil compaction will stay for longer, and it needs a combination of deep ripping and crop rotation over the long term to alleviate the compaction. While there is no easy and perfect solution to manage the issues arising out of laser levelling or reconfiguring the rows, but reserving the topsoil and spreading evenly across the field, and also having a think about how you manage the historical compaction will aid in better soil management in future.