Welcome back to the visual soil assessment. In the next few steps of the assessment, we’re going to look at porosity and some of the chemical aspects of the soil. The first one is around looking at the porosity. It’s really just lifting up a slice of that soil; it’s already very crumbly, but as we bring it up we’re looking for that structure, that porosity that allows the water to infiltrate and allow gas exchange with the root systems. A really good condition will have fine aggregates, there won’t be too much in the way of prismatic or angular shapes; if we pick them off they crumble away to very small to round in our hands – there’s a bit of shaping there. If there were roots in the field when sampling we’d see roots going all the way down through the aggregate. This to me is pretty good. It’s not brilliant, but that’s probably because of the amount of clay. There’s actually evidence of roots; it’s not beautifully friable, but it’s pretty good so the porosity here is a 1.5 out of 2. The next thing we’re going to look for is mottling in the soil. Now mottling occurs when the soil becomes anaerobic and reduces the state of various elements in the soil, and there’s a colour change associated with that. Looking at this soil here, I actually have a small amount of mottling, largely associated with organic matter. One of the things we want you to do here is assess what percentage of this face is mottled. Looking at this surface, we’ve got about 5% or less mottling, which suggests to me that this soil isn’t often anaerobic, it probably doesn’t flood, and therefore is what we consider good: I’m going to give it a 2. Another aspect of the assessment is the colour of the soil. The ideas is you’re supposed to compare it with fence line soil or tree line soil. Tree lines aren’t great as the soil type is generally different from what we have in the field; fence lines are probably more indicative of what’s in the field, and the thinking behind this is it helps us capture that idea around soil carbon. The problem we have here in Australia is we generally have very low soil carbon, and it’s very hard for the eyes to detect the subtle change in what is probably a fraction of a percent. So for soil colour, we’ll probably give it a fairly good score. So having assessed our porosity, mottles and colour, we’re ready to move on to the last part of our visual soil assessment.